# Characters

## Character Creation

See [Character Creation](character-creation.md).

## Species

A character's **species** determines their minimum and maximum attributes and move. It also grants species
characteristics, which are special rules to follow at character creation or during play.

See [Species](species.md).

## Attributes

Each character has six **attributes**, which measure basic physical and mental abilities that are common to every living
creature (and some nonliving things), no matter what universe or dimension they exist in.

*Dexterity*: A measure of how physically articulate your character is, including their hand-eye coordination and
agility.

*Strength*: Measure of your character's physical power and ability to resist damage.

*Mechanical*: Your character's prowess at operating mechanical equipment like vehicles, shields, spaceships, and
sensors.

*Knowledge*: Measure of your character's overall intelligence.

*Perception*: Your character's awareness of themself and things around them, including the ability to interact with
others.

*Technical*: Your character's ability to manipulate, repair, and modify technology.

In addition to these six attributes, some characters have the *Biotic* attribute. *Biotic* is the only attribute in
which a character may have no dice.

*Biotic*: Measure of a character's extraordinary abilities to affect mass and gravity.

A character's species defines the minimum and maximum dice they may have assigned to each attribute.

When you put dice in an attribute, you can either put whole dice in each attribute, or you can give each a mixture of
whole dice and pips. Each die equals three pips.

## Skills

**Skills** are more specific applications of an attribute. For example, the skill *sleight of hand* is a more specific
use of your character's *Dexterity*. Characters learn them through instruction or experience.

Skills are areas of expertise that are not necessarily common to every living creature. Some creatures simply don't have
the capacity to learn certain skills.

All skills beneath a given attribute begin at that attribute's die code. To highlight skills in which the character has
trained or has some experience, add skill points to the base attribute value. Each skill point is an additional pip when
using that skill. Remember that each die equals three pips.

See [Skills](skills.md).

### Specializations

You can also specialize in skills. **Specializations** reflect a greater familiarity in a particular area covered by a
base skill. One skill point equals two specialization points dice. One specialization point still equals one pip.

You don't need to have any skill points in the base skill in order to take a specialization in that skill, but when you
give your character specializations in that manner, they are treated as separate skills. If you give your character
specializations in base skills they already have skill points in, those specializations are considered bonuses to the
base skill when attempting tasks of that type.

Any left over specialization points are lost.

You roll the specialization's die code only when you use the specific item or knowledge reï¬‚ected by the specialization.
Otherwise, you roll the base skill (or attribute if you didn't put additional skill points in the full skill).

## Move & Derived Stats

Your character's **move** (usually 10) represents how many meters your character moves in a round at maximum walking
speed in standard (1 g) gravity.

Your character's **derived stats** are calculated from other values.

The derived stats defense values provide the difficulty for other character's skill checks to hit you in combat.

{{TODO: brawling/melee damage}}

{{TODO: initiative}}

Your character's **hit points** represent how much damage your character can take.

## Talents

**Talents** are special abilities a character has representing a particular aptitude they have with biotics, combat or
technology.

See [Talents](talents.md).

## Paragon/Renegade Points & Medals

**Paragon** and **Renegade** points are awarded for being brutal or gentle in various situations, or being selfish or
selfless. If you're playing a morally good person who helps the locals fight off a Geth attack for no reward or personal
gain, you could be awarded with a Paragon point for your efforts. If your character is greedy and selfish and demands
payment after saving the locals, you could be given a Renegade point by the GM. Paragon and Renegade points, besides
showing the nature of the individual, grant a mechanical bonus.

Paragon and Renegade points may be spent before rolling a *command*, *con*, *intimidation* or *persuasion* check for a
+3D bonus.

Instead, a Paragon or Renegade point may be spent after any roll for a +3 bonus to the result.

Only one Paragon or Renegade point may be spent per roll.

**Medals** are awarded for completing challenging tasks or mission objectives. It is up to the GM to figure out how
many, if any, will be given at the end of an adventure or campaign. Medals are what separates your characters from
ordinary people making them great heroes or feared villains. Only player characters may have medals.

Medals may be spent for a +3D to any roll or to heal 10 hit points.

## Equipment

{{TODO}}

## Cloning & Cybernetics

{{TODO}}

## Character Features & Other Details

Characters all have a name, career, gender, age, height, weight, and other information like background and history. For
player character's these can be detailed as the player pleases and inform how the character is played.

## Character Advancement

Between adventures, player character receive *character points*. These can spent to permanently improve the character.

See [Character Advancement](character-advancement.md).
